
I am pleased to announce version 0.2 of the complete Hurd based GNU
system.  This release runs only on PC-AT compatible systems with
i[3456]86 processors.

The GNU Hurd, plus Mach, is a kernel, not an operating system.  The
GNU operating system, like the Unix operating system, consists of many
components, including kernel, libraries, compilers, assembler, shell,
parser generators, utilities, window system, editors, text formatters,
and so on.  The GNU project set out a decade ago to develop this
system, and we've been writing various components of it ever since.

This release uses the GNUmach distribution of the Mach kernel, version
1.1.3.  Popular PC devices are generally supported.

This release does not contain the X Window System.

This release may be fetched from the directory
ftp://prep.ai.mit.edu/pub/gnu/gnu-0.2.  (prep.ai.mit.edu is 18.159.42,
for the nameserver-impaired).

In that directory, you should find the following files:

README
SOURCES
INSTALL-binary
grub-boot.image			(about 1.5 MB, not compressed)
gnu-0.2.tar.gz			(about 73 MB compressed)

SOURCES contains a complete list describing the sources for the
binaries found in the image.  INSTALL-binary contains complete
installation instructions for this release.

(The files README, SOURCES, and INSTALL-binary are also found in the
root directory of the gnu-0.2 release.)

gnu-0.2.tar.gz holds the image of the complete system.  It unpacks
into a directory that requires approximately 285 MB of disk space.

grub-boot.image is an image of a 3.5" floppy disk that you will need
in order to complete part of the installation instructions.

The following free software packages are included in this release:

autoconf automake bash bc binutils bison cpio cvs diffutils doschk
e2fsprogs ed emacs emacs lisp manual fileutils findutils flex from g77
gawk gcal gcc gdb gettext glibc gmp gnuchess gnumach gnugo grep grub
gzip hello hurd indent inetutils less libg++ lynx m4 make miscfiles
ncurses nethack nvi patch perl ptx readline rcs recode sed sendmail
sh-utils sharutils tar termutils texinfo textutils time wdiff

--

Here are md5sum checksums for the files mentioned in this message:

3749b016ab581e007b90d17b9092e134  INSTALL-binary
1f800c326ba4c3a0b3f3a3463597317b  README
40d1e1a38dd86f28fe2718081ac865cb  SOURCES
f29c1a03c1667a8019b66f6effa89d39  gnu-0.2.tar.gz
8ad3c7254802a16068a956e836266212  grub-boot.image
