Date: Mon, 5 Aug 1996 22:36:31 -0400
From: thomas@gnu.ai.mit.edu (Thomas Bushnell, n/BSG)
To: info-gnu@prep.ai.mit.edu, hurd-ann@gnu.ai.mit.edu, hurd-dev@gnu.ai.mit.edu
Subject: Hurd 0.0 and GNU 0.0 released
X-Name-Change: My name used to be `Michael'; now it is `Thomas'.
X-Tom-Swiftie: "I guess I shouldn't have broken the mirror," Tom reflected.




I am pleased to announce version 0.0 of the GNU Hurd, available via
anonymous FTP from prep.ai.mit.edu [18.159.0.42] in the file
/pub/gnu/hurd-0.0.tar.gz (about 1.2 MB compressed).

This file contains complete source code for the following:

Hurd servers: 
 
 auth, crash, devio, devport, exec, ext2fs, fifo, fwd, ifsock, init,
 magic, new-fifo, nfs, null, pfinet, pflocal, proc, symlink, term,
 ufs.

Hurd libraries: 
 
 diskfs, fshelp, ihash, iohelp, netfs, pager, pipe, ports, ps,
 shouldbeinlibc, store, threads, trivfs.

Hurd utilities and other programs: 

 boot, shd, ps, settrans, showtrans, sync, su, mount, fsysopts,
 storeinfo, login, w, uptime, hurdids, loginpr, sush, vmstat,
 portinfo, devprobe, reboot, halt, fsck, fsck.ufs, mkfs.ufs, clri.ufs,
 stati.ufs, getty, rc.


------


In addition, we have prepared a binary distribution of a complete
version 0.0 GNU system corresponding to this Hurd release.  This
release runs only on PC-AT compatible systems with i[345]86
processors.

The GNU Hurd, plus Mach, is a kernel, not an operating system.  The
GNU operating system, like the Unix operating system, consists of many
components, including kernel, libraries, compilers, assembler, shell,
parser generators, utilities, window system, editors, text formatters,
and so on.  The GNU project set out a decade ago to develop this
system, and we've been writing various components of it ever since.

This release uses the `UK22' version of the Mach kernel, as
distributed by the University of Utah.  It is too difficult to prepare
a detailed list of supported devices at this point.  Common disk
controllers and ethernet cards are generally supported.

This release does not contain the X Window System.

This release may be fetched by anonymous FTP from prep.ai.mit.edu
[18.159.42] in the directory /pub/gnu/gnu-0.0/.

In that directory, you should find the following files:

 README
 SOURCES
 INSTALL-binary
 grub-boot.image		(about 1.4 MB, not compressed)
 gnu-0.0.tar.gz			(about 56.9 MB compressed)
 gnu-0.0-stripped.tar.gz	(about 26.2 MB compressed)

SOURCES contains a complete list describing the sources for the
binaries found in the image.  INSTALL-binary contains complete
installation instructions for this release.  

(The files README, SOURCES, and INSTALL-binary are also found in the
root directory of the gnu-0.0 release.)

gnu-0.0.tar.gz holds the image of the complete system.  It unpacks
into a directory that requires approximately 233 MB of disk space.

gnu-0.0-stripped.tar.gz holds the same contents as gnu-0.0, except
that executable programs have been stripped to save space, and the
libraries have had debugging symbols stripped to save space and speed
linking.  It unpacks into a directory that requires about 85.5 MB of
disk space.

We recommend using the unstripped image, or you will be unable to
debug anything.  Surely there are bugs.  So fetch the unstripped
image, at least to have around.

grub-boot.image is an image of a 3.5" floppy disk that you will need
in order to complete part of the installation instructions.

The following free software packages are found in this release:

 autoconf, automake, bash, bc, binutils, bison, cpio, cvs, diffutils,
 doschk, e2fsprogs, ed, emacs, fileutils, findutils, flex, from, gawk,
 gcal, gcc, gdb, gdbm, gettext, glibc, gmp, gperf, grep, grub, gzip,
 hello, hurd, indent, inetutils, less, mach, make, m4, miscfiles,
 ncurses, nethack, nvi, patch, ptx, rcs, readline, recode, sed,
 serverboot, sharutils, shellutils, tar, termcap, termutils, texinfo,
 textutils, time, wdiff.


------


Here are md5sum checksums for the files mentioned in this message:

b5f888bab3eb193fe97a00a141324c9d  INSTALL-binary
345dcd826747d7b11fc78f4db162d75b  README
1a5744bb4ed3448045fa6d24153d65fe  SOURCES
f7b1bc428bc4ee29977a5b28f5762092  gnu-0.0-stripped.tar.gz
24554c58e5c89f295176e17d21dbae8e  gnu-0.0.tar.gz
8338c619d860b71bc4128c9c0fd39d63  grub-boot.image
1fd18ccc4c81d051b83d28b13dc07ee2  hurd-0.0.tar.gz

-----

Br. Thomas Bushnell, n/BSG

