[[meta copyright="Copyright Â© 2008 Free Software Foundation, Inc."]]

[[meta license="""[[toggle id="license" text="GFDL 1.2+"]][[toggleable
id="license" text="Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this
document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.2 or
any later version published by the Free Software Foundation; with no Invariant
Sections, no Front-Cover Texts, and no Back-Cover Texts.  A copy of the license
is included in the section entitled
[[GNU_Free_Documentation_License|/fdl]]."]]"""]]

- People agreed that some small projects should be done to during the bonding
  period: ideas that floated around were fixing some of the build failures or
  looking at the new debian installer.
  http://unstable.buildd.net/buildd/hurd-i386_Failed.html
  http://unstable.buildd.net/index-hurd-i386.html
  For some context:
  http://dept-info.labri.fr/~thibault/tmp/graph-radial.ps
  Don't pick something that looks too critical, it'll probably be too hard

- Antrik was ok with not having a formal weekly report as long as the
  repositories are growing and the students are around

- Discussion about scms. It's ok to have your own, you'll get you own branch,
  just make sure to make your own repository public. There was some talk about
  not checking in one huge commit at the end

- Copyright assignments to the FSF are required for most of hurd and other gnu
  projects. http://lists.gnu.org/archive/html/bug-hurd/2008-03/msg00175.html
  is your friend. Fill it out 3 times: Mach, Hurd, glibc. It's ok if you're
  not planning on working on all of these

- Non-SoC students were offered some compensation for doing their projects
  anyway. They were far more interested in the fact that they would be doing
  worthwhile work than financial compensation

- It was agreed that regular meetings would be a good idea. Once or twice per
  week, especially in the bonding period. 

- In general it was agreed that conversations shouldn't stay between just
  mentors and their students, that it's better to keep everything out in the
  open

- Non-SoC students were assigned mentors, though it was agreed that they would
  be mostly a primary contact and that most conversations should be kept
  public

- Discussion turned back to the meetings, the usual back and forth about the
  timeslot. Fridays at 19 UTC was decided as the meeting time.

- It was suggested that students look into writing documentation/guides for
  hurd, for example corss-compiling hurd on gentoo, as a way to get more
  familliar.

- Andrei will set up a google calendar for organizing meetings.

- Antrik noted that IRC is good for quick questions but serious ones should go
  to the mailing list to get everyone involved.

And so the first meeting was concluded.


